# Transcription: Hikari Sorensen — "What we are and what we want to do"

**Source:** https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=naTlcEnrUQs
**Transcription method:** Whisper-Small (244M params) on Hailo-10H AI HAT+ 2 (Raspberry Pi 5)
**Date:** 2026-03-26

---

So Yasha will actually in a sec give an outline of the outline of the day. So, Yashaw will, actually, in a sec, give an outline of the road, and everything complete with slides and all that. So, I thought, you know, so, not to reiterate, I might just give a brief thing on why I am particularly interested in this, and in ways that I think are also, generally, socially relevant, and not just, I'm also a nerd who's really into this. So, I mean, we want to understand consciousness, and, you know, presumably, you do too, do to, in some way at least, maybe that's even why you're in this room right now. Consciousness is this thing of which we have this immediate experience. In fact, it is immediate experience, itself. itself in some sense. And yet, it's remained largely outside the realm of rigorous science, And maybe that's because this thing, this subjective experience that we have is, maybe by definition, a prior private, right We don't have access to each other, not direct access to each other's phenomenal experience in ways that allow for the kind of rigorous testing or replicability that, you know, is prerequisite for science. We can, of course, ask each other what's going on, but that requires, you know, first, this self, on, and then this compression into a kind of communicable language, and then once you communicate It requires the receiver to interpret that communication itself and of this compression and of this self-ind, It's all very kind of lossy and not super reliable. And this is in the case that we're talking about humans, who we do actually assume have a kind of conscious experience. So you can imagine it's even more complex when we're talking to large language models, that are explicitly trained on text that speaks explicitly of a conscious experience, whether or not that's actually reflective of something on the inside. But indeed, we've built these things, right? we've built these LLMs that talk about conscious experience, among other things, and pretty convincingly, too. we've built these intelligent machines that do things that we once thought not possible by machines. They write poetry. They solve these complex problems. They recognize objects and images and all these things that we have only seen before in other humans and other conscious agents. So I think it's actually a reasonable question to ask if we can simulate behaviors, right, that have so far been, and that we, certainly in ourselves, recognize as being downstream of a conscious experience, right? And if we can simulate these behaviors to arbitrarily high fidelity, does this entail a simulation in some form of that upstream, generative conscious experience? Maybe, maybe not. And of course, maybe you want to argue that the thing that's immediately causally upstream of that behavior is not actually consciousness, but I think that's an argument that you'd have to make. And me personally, I think actually, you know, the simplest way, maybe, the simplest mechanism by which our navigation and interface with this very complex environment that we're in, that consciousness is the simplest mechanism, by which that's possible. But in any case, you know, can we simulate consciousness itself? And if we can simulate this, right, then for the first time in human history, we've found this this maybe more rigorous scientific way for asking and investigating these really deep questions about the nature of subjective experience. So I think this for me in many ways is the mission of CIMC, right? we are wanting to pursue this possibility, this potential, that computational simulation of consciousness, which maybe can maybe can maybe can be be meaningfully and functionally identified with consciousness itself, right? that this can finally give us the tools to study consciousness, right, with the same kind of have a bigger that we applied to modern physics or chemistry. And what's amazing to me and what makes this really compelling to do now is that it doesn't actually feel so much as just the realm of science fiction, right? this, the reality of this, this possibility, the realizability, right, this feels, it seems to to be increasing, practically daily. Today's models can do what last years or even last months models could not. where will we be next year? And I can maybe imagine where we might be next year, But even more than that, I imagine that whatever I imagine now, it's going to be surpassed. Right? And I think this is the right way to think about it. My own mental model should be constantly updating, because whatever fixed model I have at any given moment will be immediately out of date. And that brings me to an important part of this project, right? It's that the theoretical, the epistemic foundations need to be laid right. There's this really nice quote from Kant human reason to finish its building and speculation and as early as possible and then only to examine whether the foundations for it have been well laid just embellishments are sought in order to console us with the prowess of the foundations or even to reject such a late and dangerous examination altogether. So that's from critique of pure reason. And to me, that's to say, the looking itself needs to be represented as well. It's not just that phenomena are being looked at, right? The looking is also a phenomenon that needs to be looked at. And this ought, I think, to be true in science in general, although, frankly, it might not always be. But certainly needs to be true here, when what we're studying is looking to look to make meaningful sense of. So, indeed, this is a philosophical project, as much as it is a technical one. We're not building an app, right We're reverse engineering consciousness itself, we're developing formal theories of subjective experience and testing them with computational implementations. were establishing a rigorous criteria for recognizing consciousness in artificial systems. I think we're not that far away from artificial systems that exhibit much of, may, if not all, the important, meaningful, behavioral markers of consciousness, if, you know, when, the, those lights turn on, will we know how to recognize it? And what will those lights illuminate? and will we be prepared for what we see? And we're also wanting to think about the ethics of this, right? will we understand our ethical obligations in this light of what we see? For me, this is why it's urgent, I don't know how far away this is, if it will even happen, but I do have my guesses, and I'm I'm not certain that this won't happen, suit, maybe, and I'm actually not comfortable ungambling on that uncertainty. if there is a chance, you know, any chance that these machines can be conscious, the ones today or the ones in the next few years, right? more decade, and indeed I'm not certain that they can't be. If there is that chance, then I actually feel an ethical obligation to be prepared for that, both for humanity and for those agents, right? We don't want to increase suffering in the world, both for us or them. And, you know, I mean, regardless of what your perspective is on consciousness, whether you think it can emerge in machines or not, I certainly think as an idea, it's one that is going to dominate our near future, right? We get all these emails from people. I mean, actually, Yoshla gets them, but then he promptly forwards them to us. But all these people are basically saying stories too. Oftentimes these AI, you know, need help escaping, right? or somehow being manifest and embodied in some real embodied form. But in either case, it's really hard to deny that this matters to the world, And that is something that people are interested in. I think we need to address this idea right. we need to address it right scientifically, we want to address it right philosophically, epistemically, ethically, aesthetically, right? And I earnestly think that the team that we've built here, you know, alongside our advisors and the community that's gathered around us, I really think that this is the best job we have. I do actually worry about AGI and conscious machines, and the dangers they might pose, I'm not, you know, I don't want a, I don't want a to ignore it to that. And so I do think that this needs to be done, carefully, and thoughtfully, and ethically, right? I don't want AGI or machine consciousness to be developed by for-profit entities whose incentives aren't well-aligned with care and caution. I also don't want it emerging, you know, spontaneously, accidentally in a context that's not prepared to deal with it. I don't know if that will happen, but I don't know that it won't. I think we need to do that right, and I think we as humanity need to do it right. I personally want to do that right. And so I hope that you will join us in that You I'm going to go to the right way. You can't see it.
